# Multi-dimensional outcomes

While theories of motivation acknowledge that hedonic stimuli can provide reward
across many dimensions (e.g., food, water, shock), most experimental studies
use hedonic stimuli that vary across a single dimension (shock/food/juice for animals,
money or points for people). However, the hedonic outcomes of many choices,
especially for people, are multidimensional. The experience of going to a
restaurant will be affected by the quality of the service and of the food.
Choices about how much to work may affect pay, stress level, and social
relationships. A hike may feature both a beautiful vista and dehydration.

Once hedonic stimuli posess multiple dimensions, the effect of experienced
outcomes on future choices becomes potentially more complex. A decision-maker
might come to deploy attention differentially cross the outcome dimensions,
causing differences in received reward across one dimension to affect behavior
more than difference in received reward across another dimension.

## Attention

There's a rich literature on the determinants of attention to non-hedonic
stimuli. Some aspects of the attention to a stimulus are determined by the
stimulus itself. Some stimuli are more intense or salient - a bright light draws
more attention than a dim one. But to an important degree attention is
selective, and responds to the structure of the environment over time. In
classical conditioning, a large literature shows that attention to a non-hedonic
stimulus (CS) is determined by the extent to which it allows the animal to
*predict* an outcome that was not otherwise predictable. When a CS is repeatedly
experienced with no outcome, animals cease attending the stimulus and fail to
learn later contingencies between CS and US (latent inhibition). 

Richer attentional effects emerge when predictive stimuli have multiple
dimensions, as in the literature on category learning. People adjust their
attention across dimensions in order to distinguish categories, and come to
ignore dimensions that offer no predictive value.

### Attention to hedonic stimuli

Just as animals preexposed to a non-hedonic stimulus fail to later learn that
the stimulus predicts an outcome, animals preexposed to an uncontrollable
hedonic stimulus (such as shock or food) fail to later learn that the stimulus
can be predicted and controlled. This phenomenon, termed learned helplessness,
has sparked vigorous debate about its possible causes. But while it may be in
part motivational or emotional in nature, there is evidence that it shares
similarities with the kind of conditioned inattention that occurs during latent
inhibition. And just as inattention to irrelevant discriminative stimulus
dimensions aids optimal behavior, inattention to uncontrollable hedonic stimuli
may be adaptive by preventing costly superstitious learning.

The learned helplessness effect suggests that attention to hedonic stimuli may
change based on the contingencies of the environment over time. But just as
category learning experiments with multi-dimensional discriminative stimuli
allow a fuller understanding of selective attention than latent inhibition
experiments (especially with humans), so too might experiments with
multi-dimensional hedonic stimuli allow a fuller understanding of the
processing of hedonic stimuli than learned helplessness experiments. (And of
course there may be new empirical phenomena emerging from multidimensional
hedonic stimuli that are interesting in their own right.)

# Experiment 1

In Experiment 1, we test whether in a task where outcomes vary on two
dimensions, learned uncontrollability of one of the dimensions will cause
failure/slowing of learning when that dimension is later controllable.

## method

Participants perform a series of two-armed bandit tasks, where taking an action
produces an outcome with two continuous dimensions that sum to produce the total
reward. In each phase except the last, the values of the bandits change, but
there is always a small difference in means between the actions on one dimension
(low controllability) and a higher difference on the other dimension (high
controllability). In the final phase, there are equal and opposite differences
on the two dimensions. We predict people will be biased to choose the action
where reward is higher on the dimension that was predictable in the past, even
though total reward is equal across the actions.


# Experiment 2

In Experiment 2, we show that even with no changes in reward controllability
over time, differences in controllability between dimensions can cause behavior
that differs from behavior when reward is assumed to have a single dimension.

# method

Two reward dimensions with equal and opposite differences in means between
actions, but where one reward dimension has a higher variance. We predict people
will prefer the action that yields higher reward on the low-variance dimension,
even though mean total reward is the same for both actions.

# Further Experiments

We showed that controllability affects behavior, but is it really attention?
Participants might still *attend* to the outcomes but not give them any decision
weight. Can we find evidence that they're encoding the outcomes less on the
uncontrollable dimension, or giving them hedonic weight? It's hard to imagine
people stopping encoding a shock, but maybe there are some less salient outcomes
for people that they might start being more inattentive to.

Multi-step task?

Asking people to remember average values of the dimensions?

Some kind of preference questions?
